title: References

Allen, Richard, Pereira, Luis, Raes, Dirk, and Smith, Martin, 1998, Crop
evapotranspiration—Guidelines for computing crop water requirements:
Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, FAO
Irrigation and Drainage Paper No. 56, 174 p.

Allen, R.G., and Pruitt, W.O., 1986, Rational use of the FAO
Blaney‐Criddle Formula: Journal of Irrigation and Drainage
Engineering, v. 112, no. 2, p. 139–155.

Cooley, K.R., and Lane, L.J., 1982, Modified runoff curve numbers for
sugarcane and pineapple fields in Hawaii: Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation, v. 37, no. 5, p. 295–298.

Cronshey, Roger, McCuen, R.H., Miller, Norman, Rawls, Walter, Robbins,
Sam, and Woodward, Don, 1986, Urban hydrology for small
watersheds—Technical Release 55: U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Conservation Engineering
Division, accessed August 23, 2017, at
<http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/16/stelprdb1044171.pdf>.

Dripps, W.R., and Bradbury, K.R., 2007, A simple daily
soil–water-balance model for estimating the spatial and temporal
distribution of groundwater recharge in temperate humid areas:
Hydrogeology Journal, v. 15, no. 3, p. 433–444.

Dunne, Thomas, and Leopold, Luna, 1978, Water in environmental planning:
W.H. Freeman, 818 p.

Gash, J.H.C., 1979, An analytical model of rainfall interception by
forests: Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, v. 105,
no. 443, p. 43–55.

Gash, J.H.C., Lloyd, C.R., and Lachaud, G., 1995, Estimating sparse
forest rainfall interception with an analytical model: Journal of
Hydrology, v. 170, no. 1, p. 79–86.

Gash, J.H.C., and Morton, A.J., 1978, An application of the Rutter model
to the estimation of the interception loss from Thetford forest: Journal
of Hydrology, v. 38, nos. 1–2, p. 49–58.

Hanson, C.L., Neff, E.L., Doyle, J.T., and Gilbert, T.L., 1981, Runoff
curve numbers for Northern Plains rangelands: Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation, v. 36, no. 5, p. 302–305.

Hargreaves, G.H., and Samani, Z.A., 1985, Reference crop
evapotranspiration from temperature: Applied Engineering in Agriculture,
v. 1, no. 2, p. 96–99.

Hauser, V.L., and Jones, O.R., 1991, Runoff curve numbers for the
Southern High Plains: Transactions of the ASAE, v. 34, no. 1, p.
142–148.

Hawkins, R.H., Ward, T.J., Woodward, D.E., and Van Mullem, J.A., 2009,
Curve number hydrology—State of the practice: Reston, Va., American
Society of Civil Engineers, 106 p.

Horton, R.E., 1919, Rainfall interception: American Meteorological
Society, Monthly weather review, v. 47, no. 9, p. 603–623, accessed
November 1, 2016, at
<http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/1520-0493%281919%2947%3C603%3ARI%3E2.0.CO%3B2>.

Izuka, S.K., Oki, D.S., and Engott, J.A., 2010, Simple method for
estimating groundwater recharge on tropical islands: Journal of
Hydrology, v. 387, no. 1, p. 81–89.

Jensen, M.E., and Haise, H.R., 1963, Estimating evapotranspiration from
solar radiation: American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of the
Irrigation and Drainage Division, Proceedings, v. 89, p. 15–41.

McDonald, M.G., and Harbaugh, A.W., 1988, MODFLOW—A modular
three-dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model: U.S.
Geological Survey Techniques of Water-Resource Investigations, book 6,
chap. A1, 586 p.

Meeus, J.H., 1991, Astronomical algorithms: Willmann-Bell, Incorporated,
477 p.

Mishra, S.K., and Singh, V., 2003, Soil Conservation Service curve
number (SCS–CN) methodology: Dortrecht, Netherlands, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 514 p.

Molnau, Myron., and Bissell, Verno, 1983, A continuous frozen ground
index for flood forecasting, *in* Proceedings 51st Annual Meeting
Western Snow Conference: Cambridge, Ontario, Canadian Water Resources
Association, p. 109–119.

O’Callaghan, J.F., and Mark, D.M., 1984, The extraction of drainage
networks from digital elevation data: Computer vision, graphics, and
image processing, v. 28, no. 3, p. 323–344.

Savenije, H.H.G., 2004, The importance of interception and why we should
delete the term evapotranspiration from our vocabulary: Hydrological
Processes, v. 18, no. 8, p. 1507–1511.

Thornthwaite, C.W., 1948, An approach toward a rational classification
of climate: Geographical Review, v. 38, no. 1, p. 55.

Thornthwaite, C.W., and Mather, J.R., 1957, Instructions and tables for
computing potential evapotranspiration and the water balance:
Publications in Climatology, v. 10, no. 3, p. 1–104.

Veihmeyer, F.J., 1938, Evaporation from soils and
transpiration—Transactions: American Geophysical Union, v. 19, p.
612–619.

Westenbroek, S.M., Kelson, V.A., Dripps, W.R., Hunt, R.J., and Bradbury,
K.R., 2010, SWB—A modified Thornthwaite-Mather soil-water-balance code
for estimating groundwater recharge: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques
and Methods, book 6, chap. A31, p. 1–61.

Woodward, Donald; Hawkins, Richard; Jiang, Ruiyan; Hjelmfelt, Allen,
Jr.; Van Mullem, Joseph; and Quan, Quan, 2003, Runoff curve number
method—Examination of the initial abstraction ratio, *in* Conference
Proceeding Paper, Philadelphia, Pa., June 23–26, 2003, Proceedings:
Philadelphia, Pa., World Water and Environmental Resources Congress.

Zahner, Robert, 1967, Refinement in empirical functions for realistic
soil-moisture regimes under forest cover *in* Sopper, W.E., and Lull,
H.W., eds., International Symposium of Forest Hydrology: New York,
Pergamon Press, p. 261–272.
